Modern History Sourcebook: 
Queen Elizabeth I: 
Against the Spanish
Armada, 1588 

In the sixteenth century, England experienced a cultural
efflorescence and acquired a clear modern national identity. Part of
that identity - insular and Protestant - was formed in conflict with
Spain, the leading Catholic power of the day. A defining moment occurred
with the attack of the Spanish Armada in 1588. Elizabeth I of England
(1533-1603) was the daughter of King Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, and
proved to be a canny ruler. These are her words when she visited her
troops in the field.

My loving people, we have been persuaded by some, that are careful of
our safety, to take heed how we commit ourselves to armed multitudes,
for fear of treachery; but I assure you, I do not desire to live to
distrust my faithful and loving people. Let tyrants fear; I have always
so behaved myself that, under God, I have placed my chiefest strength
and safeguard in the loyal hearts and good will of my subjects. And
therefore I am come amongst you at this time, not as for my recreation
or sport, but being resolved, in the midst and heat of the battle, to
live or die amongst you all; to lay down, for my God, and for my
kingdom, and for my people, my honor and my blood, even the dust. I know
I have but the body of a weak and feeble woman; but I have the heart of
a king, and of a king of England, too; and think foul scorn that Parma
or Spain, or any prince of Europe, should dare to invade the borders of
my realms: to which, rather than any dishonor should grow by me, I
myself will take up arms; I myself will be your general, judge, and
rewarder of every one of your virtues in the field. I know already, by
your forwardness, that you have deserved rewards and crowns; and we do
assure you, on the word of a prince, they shall be duly paid you. In the
mean my lieutenant general shall be in my stead, than whom never prince
commanded a more noble and worthy subject; not doubting by your
obedience to my general, by your concord in the camp, and by your valor
in the field, we shall shortly have a famous victory over the enemies of
my God, of my kingdom, and of my people.

Elizabeth I, 1588 